What's New in 1.1 (#3647)
sunpy/sunpy: docs/whatsnew/1.1.rst

.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-1.1:

************************
What's New in SunPy 1.1?
************************

Overview
========

The SunPy project is pleased to announce the 1.1 release of the sunpy package.

The headline changes in 1.1 are:

* The `~sunpy.coordinates` subpackage now supports four additional coordinate frames (HCI, HEE, GSE, and GEI).
* Remote Data Manager (#3124)

> * SUVI support (#3269 / #3301)

Reviewer: Spell out acronym or add link to somewhere else? (I have no idea what SUVI is...)

Author: I copy pasted these bullet points so I knew what I was putting in the doc, they should all probably be re-written like Albert did with the first one. :smile:

> * Initial support for WISPR data (#3501)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Initial support for WISPR data from Parker Solar Probe (#3501)
```

> * The import times for `sunpy` and some subpackages are significantly shorter, with no loss of functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Significantly shorter import times for `sunpy` and some subpackages, with no loss of functionality.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't really care whether this change is made, but the items in this list should be parallel in construction.  If this change is made, then the first list item should also be a non-sentence.

On this page, you can read about some of the big changes in this release:

* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-python`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-coordinates`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-dl_manager`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-SUVI`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-WISPR`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-importtime`

SunPy 1.1 also includes a large number of smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the :ref:`changelog`.

By the numbers:

* XX commits have been added since 1.0
* XX issues have been closed since 1.0
* XX pull requests have been merged since 1.0
* XX people have contributed since 1.0
* XX new contributors

.. _whatsnew-1.1-python:

Supported versions of Python
============================

> SunPy 1.1 comes with support for Python versions 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8.

Reviewer: Putting this in what's new makes it sound like this support is all new, but probably only support for 3.8 is new?

                ICRS
                HCRS
                HeliocentricMeanEcliptic
                astropy [label="Other Astropy frames" shape=box3d style=filled]
                geocentric [label="Earth-centered frames (including GEO)" shape=box3d style=filled]
                astropy -> ICRS
                geocentric -> ICRS
                ICRS -> astropy
                ICRS -> geocentric
        }
        subgraph cluster_sunpy {
                color=crimson
                fontcolor=crimson
                penwidth=2
                label=<<b>Frames implemented in SunPy</b>>
                Helioprojective
                Heliocentric
                HeliographicStonyhurst
                HeliographicCarrington
                subgraph cluster_sunpy11 {
                        color=chocolate
                        fontcolor=chocolate
                        label=<<b>Requires SunPy 1.1</b>>
                        HeliocentricInertial
                        HeliocentricEarthEcliptic
                        GeocentricSolarEcliptic
                        GeocentricEarthEquatorial
                }
        }
        newrank=true
   }

> 

Reviewer: Would be nice to have a link to the coordinate transformations bit of the docs here. (See <link> for the coordinate transformation documentation)

Reviewer 2: It's already linked through the `sunpy.coordinates` link, just without any blatant indicator.

Author: I think that in this case that is sufficient, as `sunpy.coordinates` takes you to the most relevant docs.

Reviewer 2: Welp, I ended up adding a sentence to advertise the new coordinate-system table too, so resolving this.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-dl_manager:

Manager for Versioned Data Files
================================

> SunPy 1.1 provides a data manager for versioning and caching remote files. Given the URL of a remote file and a SHA256 hash, the `~sunpy.data.manager.require` decorator can be added to functions that require specific data files from remote sources (e.g. computing instrument response functions). If the specified hash does not match that of the remote version, an exception is raised to make the user aware of any changes on the remote server or tampering with local files. Additionally, `~sunpy.data.cache` can be used to avoid re-downloading files that already exist on a user's local machine, thus saving disk space and internet bandwidth.

Reviewer: Split this over a few lines? Also a link to the actual docs for doing all this would be nice.

Author: The docs for data manager are a little wonky because of the fact that `sunpy.data.manager` is an instance (like Fido) need to look into that.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-SUVI:

Support for SUVI Data
=====================

The Solar Ultraviolet Imager (SUVI) is a EUV instrument imaging the full disk of the Sun in six passbands, and is onboard the latest of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) missions.  `~sunpy.map.SUVIMap` provides SunPy map support for SUVI FITS image data.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-WISPR:

Initial Support for WISPR Images
================================

Following the first data release from Parker Solar Probe, SunPy 1.1 supports loading WISPR imaging data into a `~sunpy.map.GenericMap`.
Due to the complex projections in the WISPR data this involved changing the way sunpy converts FITS headers into `astropy.wcs.WCS` objects.

> It is expected that sunpy 2.0 will include more complete support for WISPR and other PSP data.

Reviewer: Which other PSP data? WISPR is the only imaging instrument.

Author: Is there timeseries data we should be supporting?

Reviewer: Ah good point, there's radio data, and SEP data that SunPy probably wants to support so this is fine as is.

                geocentric [label="Earth-centered frames (including GEO)" shape=box3d style=filled]
                astropy -> ICRS
                geocentric -> ICRS
                ICRS -> astropy
                ICRS -> geocentric
        }
        subgraph cluster_sunpy {
                color=crimson
                fontcolor=crimson
                penwidth=2
                label=<<b>Frames implemented in SunPy</b>>
                Helioprojective
                Heliocentric
                HeliographicStonyhurst
                HeliographicCarrington
                subgraph cluster_sunpy11 {
                        color=chocolate
                        fontcolor=chocolate
                        label=<<b>Requires SunPy 1.1</b>>
                        HeliocentricInertial
                        HeliocentricEarthEcliptic
                        GeocentricSolarEcliptic
                        GeocentricEarthEquatorial
                }
        }
        newrank=true
   }

.. _whatsnew-1.1-dl_manager:

Manager for Versioned Data Files
================================

SunPy 1.1 provides a data manager for versioning and caching remote files.

> The objective of this is provide a way for data required for functions, such as instrument correction routines, to depend on non-local data in a reliable way.

Reviewer 3: Add 'to' between 'is' and 'provide'

> The objective of this is provide a way for data required for functions, such as instrument correction routines, to depend on non-local data in a reliable way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The objective of this is to provide a way for data required for functions, such as instrument correction routines, to depend on non-local data in a reliable way.
```

> The objective of this is provide a way for data required for functions, such as instrument correction routines, to depend on non-local data in a reliable way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The remote data manager provides a way for functions, such as instrument correction routines, to depend on non-local data in a reliable way.
```

> While also providing a guarantee that a specific version of the code uses a specific data file, with the ability for users to specify updated files.

Reviewer 3: This isn't a complete sentence. Is this meant to be combined with the previous sentence?

> This works by providing the URL of a remote file and a SHA256 hash to the `~sunpy.data.manager.require` decorator which can be added to functions that require these specific data files from remote sources (e.g. computing instrument response functions).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This works by providing the URL of a remote file and a SHA256 hash to the `~sunpy.data.manager.require` decorator which can be added to functions that require these specific data files from remote sources.
```

The objective of this is to provide a way for data required for functions, such as instrument correction routines, to depend on non-local data in a reliable way.
The data manager also guarantees that a specific version of the code uses a specific data file, with the ability for users to specify updated files.

This works by providing the URL of a remote file and a SHA256 hash to the `~sunpy.data.manager.require` decorator which can be added to functions that require these specific data files from remote sources.
If the specified hash does not match that of the remote version, an exception is raised to make the user aware of any changes on the remote server or corruption of local files.
Additionally, `~sunpy.data.cache` can be used to avoid re-downloading files that already exist on a user's local machine, thus saving disk space and internet bandwidth.

See :ref:`remote-data` for more details.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-SUVI:

Support for SUVI Data
=====================

The Solar Ultraviolet Imager (SUVI) is a EUV instrument imaging the full disk of the Sun in six passbands, and is onboard the latest of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) missions.

> `~sunpy.map.SUVIMap` provides SunPy map support for SUVI FITS image data, and the `~sunpy.net.sources.goes.SUVIClient` adds support for search SUVI data directly from NOAA via `Fido <sunpy.net.fido_factory.UnifiedDownloader>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`~sunpy.map.SUVIMap` provides SunPy map support for loading SUVI FITS image data, and the `~sunpy.net.sources.goes.SUVIClient` adds support to search for SUVI data hosted by NOAA via `Fido <sunpy.net.fido_factory.UnifiedDownloader>`. It supports searching for wavelength, level of data (level 2 data which consists of stacked level 1b images and original level 1b files), as well as GOES satellite number (>= GOES 16).
```

.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-1.1:

************************
What's New in SunPy 1.1?
************************

Overview
========

The SunPy project is pleased to announce the 1.1 release of the sunpy package.

The headline changes in 1.1 are:

* The `~sunpy.coordinates` subpackage now supports four additional coordinate frames (HCI, HEE, GSE, and GEI).
* A new subpackage `sunpy.data.data_manager` has been added to support versioned data for functions and methods.
* Support in `sunpy.map` and `sunpy.net` for the SUVI instrument on GOES satellites.
* Initial support for WISPR data from Parker Solar Probe in `sunpy.map`.
* The import times for `sunpy` and some subpackages are significantly shorter, with no loss of functionality.

On this page, you can read about some of the big changes in this release:

* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-python`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-coordinates`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-dl_manager`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-SUVI`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-WISPR`
* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-importtime`

SunPy 1.1 also includes a large number of smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the :ref:`changelog`.

By the numbers:

> * XX commits have been added since 1.0

Author: I will update these numbers closer to release when I do the release notes.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-dl_manager:

Manager for Versioned Data Files
================================

SunPy 1.1 provides a data manager for versioning and caching remote files.
The objective of this is to provide a way for data required for functions, such as instrument correction routines, to depend on non-local data in a reliable way.
The data manager also guarantees that a specific version of the code uses a specific data file, with the ability for users to specify updated files.

This works by providing the URL of a remote file and a SHA256 hash to the `sunpy.data.manager.require <sunpy.data.data_manager.Manager.require>` decorator which can be added to functions that require these specific data files from remote sources.
If the specified hash does not match that of the remote version, an exception is raised to make the user aware of any changes on the remote server or corruption of local files.
Additionally, `sunpy.data.cache <sunpy.data.data_manager.Cache>` can be used to avoid re-downloading files that already exist on a user's local machine, thus saving disk space and internet bandwidth.

See :ref:`remote_data` for more details.

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

.. _whatsnew-1.1-WISPR:

Initial Support for WISPR Images
================================

Following the first data release from Parker Solar Probe, SunPy 1.1 supports loading WISPR imaging data into a `~sunpy.map.GenericMap`.
Due to the complex projections in the WISPR data this involved changing the way sunpy converts FITS headers into `astropy.wcs.WCS` objects.
It is expected that sunpy 2.0 will include more complete support for WISPR data.

.. image:: 1.1-wispr.png
   :alt: A plot from SunPy of a WISPR level 3 file.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-importtime:

Speeding up import times
========================

We know that the initial import of `sunpy` or its subpackages can feel like it takes a long time, particularly on slower machines.
Some of that import time can be the result of importing other modules or external packages that are required for specialized functionality that a user may not ever actually use.
We have identified the most egregious cases and deferred those imports of dependencies to when they are actually needed.

> For example. the initial import of `sunpy.map` was sped up by ~40%(!), with no loss of functionality.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For example, the initial import of `sunpy.map` is now ~40% faster, with no loss of functionality.
```

> We will continue to look for ways to improve our import times.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We will continue to look for ways to improve import times.
```

  Matplotlib. (`#3376 <https://github.com/sunpy/sunpy/pull/3376>`__)
- `NOAAIndicesTimeSeries.peek` now checks that the `type` argument is a
  valid string, and raises a `ValueError` if it isn't. (`#3378 <https://github.com/sunpy/sunpy/pull/3378>`__)
- Observer-based coordinate frames (`~sunpy.coordinates.frames.Heliocentric` and `~sunpy.coordinates.frames.Helioprojective`) no longer assume a default observer (Earth) if no observer is specified.  These frames can now be used with no observer specified, but most transformations cannot be performed for such frames.  This removal of a default observer only affects `sunpy.coordinates`, and has no impact on the default observer in `sunpy.map`. (`#3388 <https://github.com/sunpy/sunpy/pull/3388>`__)
- The colormap stored in SunPy's Map subclasses (ie. ``map.plot_settings['cmap']``)
  can now be colormap string instead of the full `matplotlib.colormap.Colormap`
  object. To get the full `Colormap` object use the new attribute
  ``map.cmap``. (`#3412 <https://github.com/sunpy/sunpy/pull/3412>`__)
- Fix a warning in `sunpy.map.GenericMap.rotate` where the truth value of an array

>   was being calculated. This changes the behaviour of

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  was being calculated. This changes the behavior of
```

  `~sunpy.map.GenericMap.rotate` when the ``angle=`` parameter is not an
  `~astropy.units.Quantity` object to raise `TypeError` rather than `ValueError`. (`#3456 <https://github.com/sunpy/sunpy/pull/3456>`__)

> - Removed the step of reparing images (replacing non-finite entries with local mean) before coaligning them. The user is expected to do this themselves before coaligning images. If NaNs/non-finite entries are present, a warning is thrown.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Removed the step of repairing images
```

> - Removed the step of reparing images (replacing non-finite entries with local mean) before coaligning them. The user is expected to do this themselves before coaligning images. If NaNs/non-finite entries are present, a warning is thrown.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Removed the step of repairing images (replacing non-finite entries with local mean) before coaligning them. The user is expected to do this themselves before coaligning images. If NaNs/non-finite entries are present, a warning is thrown.
```

.. doctest-skip-all

.. _whatsnew-1.1:

************************
What's New in SunPy 1.1?
************************

Overview
========

The SunPy project is pleased to announce the 1.1 release of the sunpy package.

The headline changes in 1.1 are:

* New coordinate frames (#3212)
* Remote Data Manager (#3124)
* SUVI support (#3269 / #3301)
* Initial support for WISPR data (#3501)
* Reduce the import time of sunpy.map by ~40%. (#3495)

On this page, you can read about some of the big changes in this release:

* :ref:`whatsnew-1.1-python`

SunPy 1.1 also includes a large number of smaller improvements and bug fixes, which are described in the :ref:`changelog`.

By the numbers:

* XX commits have been added since 1.0
* XX issues have been closed since 1.0
* XX pull requests have been merged since 1.0
* XX people have contributed since 1.0
* XX new contributors

.. _whatsnew-1.1-python:

Supported versions of Python
============================

SunPy 1.1 comes with support for Python versions 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8.

.. _whatsnew-1.1-coordinates:

> Improvements to coordinates functionality

Author: @ayshih Can you take this section please?

Reviewer 2: Done (32d6c93), with the advertising transformation graph as a `graphviz` block

=========================================

.. _whatsnew-1.1-dl_manager:

> Manager for Versioned Data Files

Author: @wtbarnes Are you up for first drafting this, or I can do that and you can refine it if you want?

Reviewer 3: on it

Reviewer 3: Done

================================

.. _whatsnew-1.1-SUVI:

> Support for SUVI Data

Author: @wafels and @ehsteve this is yours.

Reviewer 6: Short text added.

Author: @ehsteve Is there anything specific we should mention about the Fido support?

=====================

.. _whatsnew-1.1-WISPR:

> Initial Support for WISPR Images

Author: @Cadair this one is you. :grinning:

================================

.. _whatsnew-1.1-mapimport:

> `sunpy.map` imports ~40% faster

Author: @ayshih can you do this as well?

Reviewer 2: Done (d360aa6)
